Autolyse is a fairly simple technique that is supposed to improve the flavor of 
bread.  All it entails is mixing the flour and water, then waiting for some 
amount of time (as little as 20 min or as much as 24h) before adding the salt 
and yeast.  

I want to understand why this technique works.  There are a number of 
explanations out there, but many of them seems dubious.  Here I'll lay out all 
the explanations I could find, and comment on how much sense they make to me:

1. Autolyse allows time for amylases in the dough to break the complex starches 
   in flour down into simple sugars, which are easier for the yeast to digest.

   This seems plausible to me, although I don't really get the connection 
   between faster yeast growth and better flavor.  It seems that you'd still 
   get more yeast growth by adding the yeast in the beginning, and you could 
   always just add sugar (or maybe less salt) to make the yeast grow faster.

2. Autolyse allows time for proteases to act on gluten.

   There are proteases in flour, so this is undoubtedly true.  However, it is 
   commonly claimed that these proteases help form the gluten network, and that 
   is exactly the opposite of what proteases do.  A more plausible explanation 
   for the role of proteases is that they release free amino acids (at the 
   expense of the gluten network) which can contribute to flavor via the 
   Maillard reactions.
   
   However, I don't see why adding salt or yeast would inhibit proteases.  It's 
   possible that the proteases in flour are very salt-sensitive, but that would 
   surprise me.  It's also possible that the gluten proteins are less stable in 
   the absence of salt, which would make them more vulnerable to protease 
   activity.

3. Autolyse allows the flour to more fully absorb the water, which makes the 
   dough easier to knead.

   This seems reasonable to me, although I don't think this will affect the 
   flavor.  To be a little more specific, maybe I'd say that the autolyse is 
   allowing the gluten some time to denature on its own.

Here are some explanations for leaving out they salt and yeast.

1. Salt reduces the amount of water available for hydrating the gluten and the 
   starch.

2. Yeast will consume sugar, but any gas they produce will be pounded out 
   during kneading.

Another thing worth noting is that some people claim you can add the yeast with 
the flour and the water.  At least according to this blog [1], it doesn't make 
much of a difference.

[1] http://www.northwestsourdough.com/experiments-with-autolyse-2/
